---
layout: post
title: writing a unix shell
date: 2026-04-30
---

  `shed` is a project I began working on sometime in 2023. It has gone by many names since then but the core idea has remained the same: it's a unix shell. Shells are an interesting class of program. They facilitate a direct conversation between you and your machine. Its essentially kind of like having a translator mediate a conversation between two people who speak different languages. What this means for the programmer is generally something like "ok now teach your computer how to read".

  That is obviously a very complex problem. Computers don't even know what letters are, let alone words or sentences or paragraphs or so on. So you actually do have to start from the bottom. The `IEEE Standard 1003.1-2017 2.10.1 Shell Grammar Lexical Conventions` says:
  > The input language to the shell shall first be recognized at the character level.

  This means that we actually do have to parse the user's input one character at a time. On the surface, this actually seems quite simple. Read letters until you hit a space, then take those letters and create a word. Start a new word when you hit another letter. When you're out of characters, pack the input into `execvpe` and hope it finds a command.

  But this naive approach falls apart quite quickly upon first contact with any level of complexity. For instance, if we always broke words on spaces, there would be genuinely no way to handle files or folders with spaces in their names. We need some way to actually cross that gap without starting a new word. And so, quoting becomes a thing. `/path/to/"folder with spaces"/file` is read by the shell as a single word. Anything inside of quotations is literal text, except for quotation marks. Okay, problem solved and we can move on with our lives.

  Except one of your deranged users comes up and says "hey my file actually has a quote in the name, can you handle that?". You're given some path like `/path/to/"folder "with quotations" and spaces"/file` and are tasked with making sure that the shell reads that folder's name as a single word. With the logic outlined above, the shell sees this as two words: `/path/to/"folder "with` and `quotations" and spaces"/file`. So how can we tell our shell to ignore the quotes in the filename? There is really no good answer to this question, only ugly compromises. The most ubiquitous one is to use the backslash \ to "escape" the quotations. The shell sees a backslash in the name, removes it, and then reads the next character literally.

  With escaping, the shell can now see `/path/to/"folder \"with quotations\" and spaces"/file` as a single word. Great. But our deranged user returns and says "hey my file actually has quotes that have backslashes in front of them in the name, can you handle that?". Technically yes, though it is very unsightly: `/path/to/"folder \\\"with quotations\\\" and spaces"/file`. You have to escape the escapes before you escape the quotations.

  At this point we have implemented exactly two features: quoting and escaping. In spite of only having two features, writing a command interpreter that can handle this is likely to be a few hundred lines of code. A proper lexer that can handle all of the structures laid out by POSIX will likely be 3000+ lines. And once you have a lexer, you have just the foundation. You now need to write a parser, that can consume the tokens and produce a syntax tree. Then you must write a dispatcher that can consume the syntax tree and dispatch commands.

  The parser is an interesting problem to solve. While the lexer has its character-level ambiguities to deal with, the parser has word-level ambiguities. Take this command for instance:
```bash
for for in for; do
  for=for;
  echo $for;
done
```

  The word `for` appears six times in this single command, and means something different every time. Utterly nightmarish. Many languages won't even let you do this, and will instead hard-reserve words like `for`. Shell is different, however. You have to teach your computer what each of these positions represents, so that it instead sees this:

* for      -> `for` keyword
* for      -> variable name
* in       -> `in` keyword
* for      -> array member
* ;        -> separator
* for=for  -> assignment (name=value)
* echo     -> command
* $for     -> argument (expansion)
* ;        -> separator
* done     -> `done` keyword

  If your parser can survive this without choking on anything, you have completed step two. This is nice for flat commands, but look at the position of `echo $for` in the loop:

```bash
for for in for; do
  for=for;
  echo $for; # anything can go here
done
```

  Anything can go here, even another for loop:

```bash
for for in for; do
  for=for;
  for for in for; do
    for=for;
    echo $for;
  done
done
```

  So you also have to teach your parser to handle syntax structures inside of syntax structures, up to any arbitrary depth. If your parser can handle this, and your lexer is reading input accurately, then congratulations, you can now begin to write a shell. If you've made it this far, you've likely written 5000-6000 lines of code, and we havent even started talking to our computer yet.
